GUIDE.md, before:

# **_checkmate_** docs

Technical documentation for **_checkmate_** - AI test automation with Playwright.

## Table of Contents

- [Configuration Reference](#configuration-reference)
- [Writing Effective Tests](#writing-effective-tests)
- [Cost Management](#cost-management)
- [Salesforce Testing](#salesforce-testing)
- [Test Reports](#test-reports)
- [Troubleshooting](#troubleshooting)
- [Architecture](#architecture)

## Configuration Reference

### OpenAI API Settings

| Variable                                | Default        | Description                                                                                                    |
| --------------------------------------- | -------------- | -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- |
| `OPENAI_API_KEY`                        | -              | **Required** - Your OpenAI API key (or compatible provider)                                                    |
| `OPENAI_BASE_URL`                       | -              | Optional - Override for compatible providers (Claude, Gemini, local LLMs)                                      |
| `OPENAI_MODEL`                          | `gpt-4.1-mini` | Model: gpt-5, gemini-2.5-flash, claude-4-5-sonnet etc.                                                         |
| `OPENAI_TEMPERATURE`                    | `1.0`          | Creativity (below 0.5 = deterministic, above 0.5 = creative)                                                   |
| `OPENAI_REASONING_EFFORT`               | -              | Optional - Reasoning effort for models: low, medium, high                                                      |
| `OPENAI_TIMEOUT_SECONDS`                | `60`           | API request timeout in seconds                                                                                 |
| `OPENAI_RETRY_MAX_ATTEMPTS`             | `3`            | Max retries with backoff (1s, 10s, 60s) for rate limits and server errors                                      |
| `OPENAI_TOOL_CHOICE`                    | `required`     | Tool choice: auto, required, none                                                                              |
| `OPENAI_ALLOWED_TOOLS`                  | -              | Comma-separated list of allowed tools (if not set, all tools available)                                        |
| `OPENAI_INCLUDE_SCREENSHOT_IN_SNAPSHOT` | `false`        | Include compressed screenshots in snapshot responses                                                           |
| `OPENAI_API_TOKEN_BUDGET_USD`           | -              | Optional - USD budget for total OpenAI API spend per test run. Only positive decimal values are enforced.      |
| `OPENAI_API_TOKEN_BUDGET_COUNT`         | -              | Optional - Token count limit for total tokens per test run. Only positive integers are enforced.               |
| `OPENAI_LOOP_MAX_REPETITIONS`           | `5`            | Number of repetitive tool call patterns to detect before triggering loop recovery with random temperature      |
| `CHECKMATE_LOG_LEVEL`                   | `off`          | Logging verbosity: debug, info, warn, error, off                                                               |
| `CHECKMATE_SNAPSHOT_FILTERING`          | `true`         | Enable fuzzy-search filtering for page snapshots when search keywords are provided (up to 90% token reduction) |

### Playwright Configuration

Browser settings (viewport, headless mode, video recording, timeouts, etc.) are configured in [playwright.config.ts](playwright.config.ts) using Playwright's [standard](https://playwright.dev/docs/test-configuration) configuration mechanism.

## Writing Effective Tests

### Best Practices

1. **Be Specific** - Clear expectations help the AI validate success
2. **One Action Per Step** - Break complex flows into discrete steps
3. **Include Context** - Mention relevant UI elements and expected behavior
4. **Add Timing Hints** - For slow operations, mention expected wait times
5. **Handle Popups** - Explicitly mention consent dialogs or modals

### Basic Example

```typescript
import { test } from '../../fixtures/checkmate'

test('search for playwright documentation', async ({ ai }) => {
	await test.step('Navigate to Google', async () => {
		await ai.run({
			action: `Open the browser and navigate to google.com`,
			expect: `google.com is loaded and the search bar is visible`,
		})
	})

	await test.step('Search for Playwright', async () => {
		await ai.run({
			action: `Type 'playwright test automation' in the search bar and press Enter`,
			expect: `Search results contain the playwright.dev link`,
		})
	})
})
```

### Complex Interactions

```typescript
await test.step('Fill form and submit', async () => {
	await ai.run({
		action: `
            Wait for the newsletter popup (takes ~30 seconds), 
            then close it by clicking the X button.
            Scroll to the comment section and click to activate it.
            Type 'Great article!' into the comment textarea.
            Click the Submit button.
        `,
		expect: `
            The comment is submitted, 
            and either a success message appears 
            or a login form is displayed if not authenticated.
        `,
	})
})
```

### Using Fuzzy Search for Token Optimization

For complex pages, you can additonally provide search keywords to filter page snapshots to potentially reduce token usage (usually by 50-90%).

```
debug: filterSnapshot: Scored 107 elements
debug: filterSnapshot: Filtered to 2 elements above threshold 0.6
debug: filterSnapshot: Reduced snapshot from 4283 to 326 chars (92% reduction)
```

When search keywords are provided, only relevant UI elements matching these keywords are sent to the AI. Be carefull when using this for critical assertion steps, as it may omit important elements if the keywords are not comprehensive enough. However, the AI will automatically request the full snapshot if it cannot find relevant elements using the keywords, ensuring test reliability.

**Note:** Search keywords are **not** extracted by the LLM at runtime (to avoid wasting tokens). Instead, you should provide them explicitly in your test steps. It's recommended to use your IDE's AI model to generate these keywords from your action/expect descriptions, or leverage IDE autocomplete features. You may need to review and adjust the keywords for optimal performance.

```typescript
await test.step('Search for a product', async () => {
	await ai.run({
		action: 'Type "wireless headphones" in the search bar and press Enter',
		expect: 'Search results page is displayed with product listings',

		// Optional: provide search keywords to filter the page snapshot
		search: ['search', 'input', 'button', 'textbox', 'enter'],
		// Optional: adjust the matching threshold (default: 0.3)
		threshold: 0.3,
	})
})

await test.step('Filter results', async () => {
	await ai.run({
		action: 'Click on the "Price" filter and select "Under $100"',
		expect: 'Product results are filtered to show only items under $100',
		search: ['price', 'checkbox', 'under 100', 'item'],
	})
})
```

**Tips for effective search keywords:**

- Include relevant UI element types (button, input, link, checkbox, etc.)
- Include key text that appears on the page
- Include action-related terms (search, filter, submit, etc.)
- Keep keywords short and focused (2-3 words max per keyword)
- Use 5-10 keywords per step for best results
- Review keywords generated by your IDE's AI model

## Cost Management

**_checkmate_** includes built-in token usage monitoring:

```json
{
	"response input": "2543 @ $0.00$",
	"response output": "456 @ $0.00$",
	"history (estimated)": 45234,
	"step input": "5123 @ $0.00$",
	"step output": "892 @ $0.00$",
	"test input": "25678 @ $0.01$",
	"test output": "4521 @ $0.01$"
}
```

### Cost Optimization Features

1. **Smart Snapshots** - Instead of full HTML, only the ARIA accessibility tree is sent to the AI
2. **History Filtering** - Continuously filters old page snapshots (reduces token usage by up to 50%)
3. **Snapshot Minification** - Removes unnecessary whitespace and quotes from ARIA snapshots
4. **Fuzzy Search** - Local algorithmic filtering of page snapshots using user-provided keywords (reduces token usage by up to 90%)
5. **Screenshots** - Normalized and compressed locally, helps vision models understand UI better
6. **Chat Recycling** - New session per step to prevent context bloat and isolation
7. **Token Counting** - Real-time usage tracking per step and test with budgets
8. **Loop Detection** - Detects and mitigates repetitive tool call patterns, preventing AI runaway costs

### Budgeting & Cost Limits

You can set one or both token budget environment variables to enforce limits during a single test run.

- `OPENAI_API_TOKEN_BUDGET_USD` — Sets a USD budget (e.g. 0.50) per test execution. The framework checks the current estimated cost (input+output tokens) and throws an error if the budget is exceeded.
- `OPENAI_API_TOKEN_BUDGET_COUNT` — Sets a token limit (e.g. 100000). The framework tracks input and output tokens across the test and throws an error when the total exceeds this limit.

Notes:

- Only positive numbers are enforced; `0` or non-positive values are effectively treated as disabled.
- If the env var is unset or invalid (non-number), it is ignored.

### Estimated Costs

**Gemini-2.5-flash / GPT-4.1-mini**:

- Simple test (~5 steps): ~$0.01 - $0.05
- Complex test (~20 steps): ~$0.10 - $0.40
- Full E2E suite (~50 complex tests): ~$5.00 - $20.00

**GPT-OSS-20B via groq**:

- Simple test (~5 steps): ~$0.001 - $0.01
- Complex test (~20 steps): ~$0.01 - $0.05
- Full E2E suite (~50 complex tests): ~$1.00 - $2.00

_Costs vary based on model, screenshot size and count, and page complexity_

## Salesforce Testing

**_checkmate_** includes native Salesforce support using the SF CLI.

### Prerequisites

```bash
# Install Salesforce CLI
npm install -g @salesforce/cli

# Authenticate to your org and set is as default
sf org login web --alias my-checkmate-org --set-default
```

### Example Salesforce Test

```typescript
test('create and configure itinerary', async ({ ai }) => {
	await test.step('Login to Salesforce', async () => {
		await ai.run({
			action: `Login to Salesforce org and open Test QA Application`,
			expect: `Test QA homepage is displayed`,
		})
	})

	await test.step('Create new itinerary', async () => {
		await ai.run({
			action: `
                Click 'New', select 'Quote' record type, 
                fill 'Itinerary Name' = 'AI Test', 
                'Account' = 'Test Account', 
                'Group Size' = '5', 
                then Save
            `,
			expect: `New itinerary is saved and details page is displayed`,
		})
	})
})
```

### Authentication Flow

The `login_to_salesforce_org` tool handles the complete Salesforce authentication flow:

1. Retrieves a front-door URL from the authenticated SF CLI session
2. Automatically navigates the browser to login

No manual URL handling needed - just call "Login to Salesforce" in your test action.

## Test Reports

Multiple report formats are generated after each run:

- **HTML Report**: `test-reports/html/index.html` (interactive - no screenshots/video yet though)
- **JUnit XML**: `test-reports/junit/results.xml` (CI/CD integration)
- **Console Output**: Real-time step results and token usage

```bash
# Open HTML report in browser
npx playwright show-report test-reports/html
```

## Troubleshooting

### AI makes incorrect decisions

**Symptoms**: The AI clicks wrong elements, misinterprets the page, or fails to complete actions correctly.

**Solutions**:

- Provide more precise descriptions in `action` and more focused assertions in `expect`
- Reference specific element identifiers and roles (for example: text, label, button, list)
- Break complex workflows into single-action steps; use a step-by-step approach

### Tests loop during step execution

**Symptoms**: The AI repeats the same actions or gets stuck in a loop, consuming tokens unnecessarily.

**Solutions**:

- Increase `OPENAI_TEMPERATURE` to encourage exploration
- Use a reasoning/thinking model (if available) to improve planning and avoid repetitive loops

### High token costs

**Symptoms**: Tests consume more tokens than expected, leading to high API costs.

**Solutions**:

- Set a lower reasoning effort: `OPENAI_REASONING_EFFORT`
- Consider disabling `OPENAI_INCLUDE_SCREENSHOT_IN_SNAPSHOT`
- Use a cheaper model, lower-end models often perform well (e.g., `gemini-2.5-flash-lite` or `gpt-5-nano`)

### Rate limiting errors

**Symptoms**: API calls fail with 429 errors or rate limit messages.

**Solutions**:

- The framework automatically retries with backoff (1s, 10s, 60s)
- Upgrade your API plan with your provider
- Reduce concurrent test execution
- Increase `OPENAI_TIMEOUT_SECONDS` if needed

### Timeout errors

**Symptoms**: Tests fail with timeout errors before completing actions.

**Solutions**:

- Increase `OPENAI_TIMEOUT_SECONDS` in your `.env` file
- Mention expected wait times in your action descriptions
- Break long-running actions into smaller steps

## Architecture

**_checkmate_** combines multiple components to enable AI-driven test automation:

```
Playwright Test (Runner & Reporting)
│
└── ai.run(step) ← checkmate Fixture
    │
    └── Step Manager
        │
        ├── OpenAI Client
        │   ├── Chat completions with tool calling
        │   ├── Token tracking & cost management
        │   └── Loop detection & recovery
        │
        ├── Tool Registry
        │   ├── Browser (click, type, navigate)
        │   ├── Step (pass/fail)
        │   └── Salesforce (login, auth)
        │
        ├── Response Processor
        │   ├── Snapshot minification
        │   └── History management
        │
┌───────┴─────┬──────────────┬────────────────┐
│             │              │                │
Playwright    OpenAI API     Salesforce CLI   Configuration
│             │              │                │
├─ Browsers   ├─ GPT         ├─ SF Auth       ├─ .env
├─ Snapshots  ├─ Gemini      └─ OTP URL       └─ playwright.config.ts
├─ Actions    ├─ Local
└─ Reports    └─ etc...
```

### Key Components

**Test Layer**

- Playwright Test framework manages test execution, reporting, and fixtures
- Tests written in natural language via `ai.run()` fixture

**Core Engine**

- **OpenAI Test Manager**: Orchestrates AI-driven test steps
- **OpenAI Client**: Manages LLM interactions with tool calling
- **Response Processor**: Handles tool responses, snapshot minification, and history filtering
- **Tool Registry**: Routes tool calls to appropriate handlers

**Tools**

- **Browser Tools**: Playwright Test for web automation (click, type, navigate, etc.)
- **Step Tools**: Test control (pass/fail step assertions)
- **Salesforce Tools**: SF CLI integration for Salesforce testing

**Cost Optimization**

- Token tracking with budget enforcement
- History filtering (removes old snapshots)
- Snapshot minification and screenshot compression
- Loop detection and mitigation

**Configuration**

- Test, Reporting and Browser settings: [playwright.config.ts](playwright.config.ts)
- API & AI settings: `.env` file

## Advanced Topics

### Custom Tool Integration

**_checkmate_**'s tool registry can be extended with custom tools for specific testing needs. See the `src/step/tool/` directory for examples of how tools are implemented.

### Performance Optimization

For large test suites:

- Use faster models for simple tests (e.g., `gemini-2.5-flash-lite`)
- Set token budgets to prevent runaway costs
- Disable screenshots in snapshots when visual context isn't needed
- Consider parallel test execution with Playwright's workers

### CI/CD Integration

**_checkmate_** generates JUnit XML reports compatible with most CI/CD systems:

```yaml
# Example GitHub Actions
- name: Run Tests
  run: npm test

- name: Upload Reports
  uses: actions/upload-artifact@v3
  with:
    name: test-reports
    path: test-reports/
```

---

See [readme](README.md) for more information and getting started guide.

Commit message:

feat: enhance documentation for fuzzy search functionality and token optimization

GUIDE.md, after:

# **_checkmate_** docs

Technical documentation for **_checkmate_** - AI test automation with Playwright.

## Table of Contents

- [Configuration Reference](#configuration-reference)
- [Writing Effective Tests](#writing-effective-tests)
- [Cost Management](#cost-management)
- [Salesforce Testing](#salesforce-testing)
- [Test Reports](#test-reports)
- [Troubleshooting](#troubleshooting)
- [Architecture](#architecture)

## Configuration Reference

### OpenAI API Settings

| Variable                                | Default        | Description                                                                                                    |
| --------------------------------------- | -------------- | -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- |
| `OPENAI_API_KEY`                        | -              | **Required** - Your OpenAI API key (or compatible provider)                                                    |
| `OPENAI_BASE_URL`                       | -              | Optional - Override for compatible providers (Claude, Gemini, local LLMs)                                      |
| `OPENAI_MODEL`                          | `gpt-4.1-mini` | Model: gpt-5, gemini-2.5-flash, claude-4-5-sonnet etc.                                                         |
| `OPENAI_TEMPERATURE`                    | `1.0`          | Creativity (below 0.5 = deterministic, above 0.5 = creative)                                                   |
| `OPENAI_REASONING_EFFORT`               | -              | Optional - Reasoning effort for models: low, medium, high                                                      |
| `OPENAI_TIMEOUT_SECONDS`                | `60`           | API request timeout in seconds                                                                                 |
| `OPENAI_RETRY_MAX_ATTEMPTS`             | `3`            | Max retries with backoff (1s, 10s, 60s) for rate limits and server errors                                      |
| `OPENAI_TOOL_CHOICE`                    | `required`     | Tool choice: auto, required, none                                                                              |
| `OPENAI_ALLOWED_TOOLS`                  | -              | Comma-separated list of allowed tools (if not set, all tools available)                                        |
| `OPENAI_INCLUDE_SCREENSHOT_IN_SNAPSHOT` | `false`        | Include compressed screenshots in snapshot responses                                                           |
| `OPENAI_API_TOKEN_BUDGET_USD`           | -              | Optional - USD budget for total OpenAI API spend per test run. Only positive decimal values are enforced.      |
| `OPENAI_API_TOKEN_BUDGET_COUNT`         | -              | Optional - Token count limit for total tokens per test run. Only positive integers are enforced.               |
| `OPENAI_LOOP_MAX_REPETITIONS`           | `5`            | Number of repetitive tool call patterns to detect before triggering loop recovery with random temperature      |
| `CHECKMATE_LOG_LEVEL`                   | `off`          | Logging verbosity: debug, info, warn, error, off                                                               |
| `CHECKMATE_SNAPSHOT_FILTERING`          | `true`         | Enable fuzzy-search filtering for page snapshots when search keywords are provided (up to 90% token reduction) |

### Playwright Configuration

Browser settings (viewport, headless mode, video recording, timeouts, etc.) are configured in [playwright.config.ts](playwright.config.ts) using Playwright's [standard](https://playwright.dev/docs/test-configuration) configuration mechanism.

## Writing Effective Tests

### Best Practices

1. **Be Specific** - Clear expectations help the AI validate success
2. **One Action Per Step** - Break complex flows into discrete steps
3. **Include Context** - Mention relevant UI elements and expected behavior
4. **Add Timing Hints** - For slow operations, mention expected wait times
5. **Handle Popups** - Explicitly mention consent dialogs or modals

### Basic Example

```typescript
import { test } from '../../fixtures/checkmate'

test('search for playwright documentation', async ({ ai }) => {
	await test.step('Navigate to Google', async () => {
		await ai.run({
			action: `Open the browser and navigate to google.com`,
			expect: `google.com is loaded and the search bar is visible`,
		})
	})

	await test.step('Search for Playwright', async () => {
		await ai.run({
			action: `Type 'playwright test automation' in the search bar and press Enter`,
			expect: `Search results contain the playwright.dev link`,
		})
	})
})
```

### Complex Interactions

```typescript
await test.step('Fill form and submit', async () => {
	await ai.run({
		action: `
            Wait for the newsletter popup (takes ~30 seconds), 
            then close it by clicking the X button.
            Scroll to the comment section and click to activate it.
            Type 'Great article!' into the comment textarea.
            Click the Submit button.
        `,
		expect: `
            The comment is submitted, 
            and either a success message appears 
            or a login form is displayed if not authenticated.
        `,
	})
})
```

### Using Fuzzy Search for Token Optimization

For complex pages, you can additonally provide search keywords to filter page snapshots to potentially reduce token usage (usually by 50-90%).

**This feature significantly reduces the payload size, minimizing costs while improving AI determinism, reliability and speed.**

```typescript
await ai.run({
	action: `Click on the link that leads to playwright.dev`,
	expect: `The playwright.dev homepage is displayed`,

	// optional fuzzy search settings
	search: ['link', 'playwright.dev', 'end-to-end testing'],
	threshold: 0.5,
})
```

When fuzzy search is enabled and `search` keywords are provided, the framework uses a local [Dice Coefficient](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Dice-S%C3%B8rensen_coefficient) algorithm to filter the page snapshot and only send relevant UI elements above certain `threshold` (default: 0.3) to the AI.

```
debug: Scored 107 elements
debug: Filtered to 3 elements above threshold 0.5
debug: Reduced snapshot from 4283 to 326 chars (92% reduction)
```

Feature is controlled by the `CHECKMATE_SNAPSHOT_FILTERING` env var (default: `true`) and `search` and `threshold` options in the `ai.run()` method.
Search keywords are not extracted automatically from step description when `CHECKMATE_SNAPSHOT_FILTERING` is enabled. Instead, you should provide them explicitly in your test steps.

When `search` keywords are provided, only relevant UI elements matching these keywords are sent to the AI. This is a safe reduction because the AI will automatically fetch the full snapshot in case it cannot find relevant elements using the keywords. You can use your IDE's AI model to generate search keywords from your test descriptions. For optimal results, use up to 10 relevant keywords per step and review them for accuracy and adjust the `threshold` setting to find the best balance between filtering and fetching the full snapshot.

**Note:** be careful when using this for critical assertion steps, as AI may potentially not see some important information if the keywords are not comprehensive enough.

You can use your IDE's AI model to generate keywords from your action/expect descriptions, or leverage IDE autocomplete features. However, it is highly recommended to review and adjust them manually for best performance.

**Tips for effective search keywords:**

- Include relevant UI element types (button, input, link, checkbox, etc.)
- Include key text that appears on the page
- Include action-related terms (search, filter, submit, etc.)
- Keep keywords short and focused (2-3 words max per keyword)
- Use 5-10 keywords per step for best results
- Review keywords generated by your IDE's AI model

## Cost Management

**_checkmate_** includes built-in token usage monitoring:

```json
{
	"response input": "2543 @ $0.00$",
	"response output": "456 @ $0.00$",
	"history (estimated)": 45234,
	"step input": "5123 @ $0.00$",
	"step output": "892 @ $0.00$",
	"test input": "25678 @ $0.01$",
	"test output": "4521 @ $0.01$"
}
```

### Cost Optimization Features

1. **Smart Snapshots** - Instead of full HTML, only the ARIA accessibility tree is sent to the AI
2. **History Filtering** - Continuously filters old page snapshots (reduces token usage by up to 50%)
3. **Snapshot Minification** - Removes unnecessary whitespace and quotes from ARIA snapshots
4. **Fuzzy Search** - Local algorithmic filtering of page snapshots using user-provided keywords (reduces token usage by up to 90%)
5. **Screenshots** - Normalized and compressed locally, helps vision models understand UI better
6. **Chat Recycling** - New session per step to prevent context bloat and isolation
7. **Token Counting** - Real-time usage tracking per step and test with budgets
8. **Loop Detection** - Detects and mitigates repetitive tool call patterns, preventing AI runaway costs

### Budgeting & Cost Limits

You can set one or both token budget environment variables to enforce limits during a single test run.

- `OPENAI_API_TOKEN_BUDGET_USD` — Sets a USD budget (e.g. 0.50) per test execution. The framework checks the current estimated cost (input+output tokens) and throws an error if the budget is exceeded.
- `OPENAI_API_TOKEN_BUDGET_COUNT` — Sets a token limit (e.g. 100000). The framework tracks input and output tokens across the test and throws an error when the total exceeds this limit.

Notes:

- Only positive numbers are enforced; `0` or non-positive values are effectively treated as disabled.
- If the env var is unset or invalid (non-number), it is ignored.

### Estimated Costs

**Gemini-2.5-flash / GPT-4.1-mini**:

- Simple test (~5 steps): ~$0.01 - $0.05
- Complex test (~20 steps): ~$0.10 - $0.40
- Full E2E suite (~50 complex tests): ~$5.00 - $20.00

**GPT-OSS-20B via groq**:

- Simple test (~5 steps): ~$0.001 - $0.01
- Complex test (~20 steps): ~$0.01 - $0.05
- Full E2E suite (~50 complex tests): ~$1.00 - $2.00

_Costs vary based on model, screenshot size and count, and page complexity_

## Salesforce Testing

**_checkmate_** includes native Salesforce support using the SF CLI.

### Prerequisites

```bash
# Install Salesforce CLI
npm install -g @salesforce/cli

# Authenticate to your org and set is as default
sf org login web --alias my-checkmate-org --set-default
```

### Example Salesforce Test

```typescript
test('create and configure itinerary', async ({ ai }) => {
	await test.step('Login to Salesforce', async () => {
		await ai.run({
			action: `Login to Salesforce org and open Test QA Application`,
			expect: `Test QA homepage is displayed`,
		})
	})

	await test.step('Create new itinerary', async () => {
		await ai.run({
			action: `
                Click 'New', select 'Quote' record type, 
                fill 'Itinerary Name' = 'AI Test', 
                'Account' = 'Test Account', 
                'Group Size' = '5', 
                then Save
            `,
			expect: `New itinerary is saved and details page is displayed`,
		})
	})
})
```

### Authentication Flow

The `login_to_salesforce_org` tool handles the complete Salesforce authentication flow:

1. Retrieves a front-door URL from the authenticated SF CLI session
2. Automatically navigates the browser to login

No manual URL handling needed - just call "Login to Salesforce" in your test action.

## Test Reports

Multiple report formats are generated after each run:

- **HTML Report**: `test-reports/html/index.html` (interactive - no screenshots/video yet though)
- **JUnit XML**: `test-reports/junit/results.xml` (CI/CD integration)
- **Console Output**: Real-time step results and token usage

```bash
# Open HTML report in browser
npx playwright show-report test-reports/html
```

## Troubleshooting

### AI makes incorrect decisions

**Symptoms**: The AI clicks wrong elements, misinterprets the page, or fails to complete actions correctly.

**Solutions**:

- Provide more precise descriptions in `action` and more focused assertions in `expect`
- Reference specific element identifiers and roles (for example: text, label, button, list)
- Break complex workflows into single-action steps; use a step-by-step approach

### Tests loop during step execution

**Symptoms**: The AI repeats the same actions or gets stuck in a loop, consuming tokens unnecessarily.

**Solutions**:

- Increase `OPENAI_TEMPERATURE` to encourage exploration
- Use a reasoning/thinking model (if available) to improve planning and avoid repetitive loops

### High token costs

**Symptoms**: Tests consume more tokens than expected, leading to high API costs.

**Solutions**:

- Set a lower reasoning effort: `OPENAI_REASONING_EFFORT`
- Consider disabling `OPENAI_INCLUDE_SCREENSHOT_IN_SNAPSHOT`
- Use a cheaper model, lower-end models often perform well (e.g., `gemini-2.5-flash-lite` or `gpt-5-nano`)

### Rate limiting errors

**Symptoms**: API calls fail with 429 errors or rate limit messages.

**Solutions**:

- The framework automatically retries with backoff (1s, 10s, 60s)
- Upgrade your API plan with your provider
- Reduce concurrent test execution
- Increase `OPENAI_TIMEOUT_SECONDS` if needed

### Timeout errors

**Symptoms**: Tests fail with timeout errors before completing actions.

**Solutions**:

- Increase `OPENAI_TIMEOUT_SECONDS` in your `.env` file
- Mention expected wait times in your action descriptions
- Break long-running actions into smaller steps

## Architecture

**_checkmate_** combines multiple components to enable AI-driven test automation:

```
Playwright Test (Runner & Reporting)
│
└── ai.run(step) ← checkmate Fixture
    │
    └── Step Manager
        │
        ├── OpenAI Client
        │   ├── Chat completions with tool calling
        │   ├── Token tracking & cost management
        │   └── Loop detection & recovery
        │
        ├── Tool Registry
        │   ├── Browser (click, type, navigate)
        │   ├── Step (pass/fail)
        │   └── Salesforce (login, auth)
        │
        ├── Response Processor
        │   ├── Snapshot minification
        │   └── History management
        │
┌───────┴─────┬──────────────┬────────────────┐
│             │              │                │
Playwright    OpenAI API     Salesforce CLI   Configuration
│             │              │                │
├─ Browsers   ├─ GPT         ├─ SF Auth       ├─ .env
├─ Snapshots  ├─ Gemini      └─ OTP URL       └─ playwright.config.ts
├─ Actions    ├─ Local
└─ Reports    └─ etc...
```

### Key Components

**Test Layer**

- Playwright Test framework manages test execution, reporting, and fixtures
- Tests written in natural language via `ai.run()` fixture

**Core Engine**

- **OpenAI Test Manager**: Orchestrates AI-driven test steps
- **OpenAI Client**: Manages LLM interactions with tool calling
- **Response Processor**: Handles tool responses, snapshot minification, and history filtering
- **Tool Registry**: Routes tool calls to appropriate handlers

**Tools**

- **Browser Tools**: Playwright Test for web automation (click, type, navigate, etc.)
- **Step Tools**: Test control (pass/fail step assertions)
- **Salesforce Tools**: SF CLI integration for Salesforce testing

**Cost Optimization**

- Token tracking with budget enforcement
- History filtering (removes old snapshots)
- Snapshot minification and screenshot compression
- Loop detection and mitigation

**Configuration**

- Test, Reporting and Browser settings: [playwright.config.ts](playwright.config.ts)
- API & AI settings: `.env` file

## Advanced Topics

### Custom Tool Integration

**_checkmate_**'s tool registry can be extended with custom tools for specific testing needs. See the `src/step/tool/` directory for examples of how tools are implemented.

### Performance Optimization

For large test suites:

- Use faster models for simple tests (e.g., `gemini-2.5-flash-lite`)
- Set token budgets to prevent runaway costs
- Disable screenshots in snapshots when visual context isn't needed
- Consider parallel test execution with Playwright's workers

### CI/CD Integration

**_checkmate_** generates JUnit XML reports compatible with most CI/CD systems:

```yaml
# Example GitHub Actions
- name: Run Tests
  run: npm test

- name: Upload Reports
  uses: actions/upload-artifact@v3
  with:
    name: test-reports
    path: test-reports/
```

---

See [readme](README.md) for more information and getting started guide.
